Documentation and Tools for bringing the Community Together. (#55)
NWChemEx-Project/.github: docs/source/community/pull_requests.rst

.. Copyright 2022 NWChemEx-Project
..
.. Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
.. you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
.. You may obtain a copy of the License at
..
.. http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
..
.. Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
.. distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
.. WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
.. See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
.. limitations under the License.

.. _prs_and_nwx:

###############################################
NWChemEx Community Guidelines for Pull Requests
###############################################

> TL;DR PRs are the most natural way to update a project hosted on GitHub. We

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TL;DR Pull Requests (PRs) are the most natural way to update a project hosted on GitHub. We
```

have created a PR template to help PR authors include enough detail for
reviewers to do their job. And we have suggested workflows for authors and
reviewers.

*************
What is a PR?
*************

> A PR is a GitHub feature used to contribute changes to a GitHub repo. More

Reviewer: Again, I would add some links throughout this document to GitHub documentation to help newbees who want to dig in more.

specifically, each GitHub repo contains one or more branches. When you
want to modify one of those branches you:

> #. Fork the target repo on GitHub

Reviewer: I think we had some simple instructions that covered some of this in documentation - although I can't find it at the moment.  If so, it would be good to point to that for these instructions.

Author: removed the explicit steps and added a link.

> #. Clone the fork on you local machine

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Clone the fork on your local machine
```

#. Make a new branch in your local copy.

> #. Make the changes to the new branch

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Make the changes to the new branch
#. Ensure that the changes compile and pass tests
```

#. Push the modified branch to the fork on GitHub
#. Open a PR on the target repo asking the maintainers to pull the branch from
   your fork.

*******************
Why do We Need PRs?
*******************

The master branch of each repo is considered the "single source of truth." As
a community we need to do our best to make sure this branch is the best it can
be and conforms to the design and vision of the project. Bluntly speaking, the
primary point of a PR is to make sure contributions do not invalidate the single

> source of truth by breaking the code, or moving the code in an inconsistent

Reviewer: ```suggestion
source of truth by breaking the code or moving the code in an inconsistent
```

> direction. That said, particularly in a large project like NWChemEx it can be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
direction. That said, particularly in a large project like NWChemEx, it can be
```

no one person knows every aspect of a code, so when you make a PR it may turn
out that the reviewer knows a better way to do something. This works both ways
and reviewers often learn new techniques or discover previously unknown
features by reviewing code.

PRs are also about staking a claim. When you open a draft PR you're telling
people that you are going to work on resolving a bug etc. This tells other
people not to duplicate the effort and/or gives them a chance to join the
cause.

*****************
PR Considerations
*****************

This section lists considerations for authors and/or reviewers of PRs.
Following semantic versioning, we can think of each PR as addressing one of
three use cases:

#. API breaking changes

   - Any change to a public-facing API which breaks previously working code.

#. New features

   - Introduces new code without breaking the API
   - New alternative APIs
   - Allows the code to compute new things
   - Quality of life improvements (e.g., extensive optimization)
   - Entirely new documentation sections

#. Patch

   - Largely modifies existing code
   - Bug fixes, typos, documentation tweaks

>    - Performance optimizations spanning a couple lines of code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Performance optimizations spanning a relatively small amount of code
```

In general the PR considerations are going to be highly tied to what the PR
wants to accomplish, the following subsections group considerations by use cases
and assume archetypal PRs. In other words, not all points are going to be
relevant to every PR. If they're not relevant for a specific PR they should be
ignored.

General Considerations
======================

#. Making a PR should be easy.

   - If it's too hard to make a PR people won't do it.
   - Setting the bar too high discourages new contributors.

#. Should be possible to open the PR early

   - Channel for discussion between reviewers and the PR author.
   - Gets work on radar of reviewers and other developers.
   - Time to hash out what is and is not in scope before time is wasted

#. PR lifetimes should be short.

   - The code base moves fast, PRs get stale quickly.

>    - Shoot for merging in less than two weeks.

Reviewer: This one may be a sticking point - especially if you open the PR early to get feedback.

Author: I think this really only applies if you open the PR early. If you're not opening the PR early then it should be ready to go instantly (and assuming it's not completely off the mark, it should be merged in well under two weeks).

Again I'm not wed to two weeks, that time frame is what true agile recommends, if we want a somewhat longer time frame that's okay too.

>    - Merge function by function if necessary.

Reviewer: Would you track the overall functionality that you are adding in a "large" PR or an issue or......

Author: issue, added a link.

#. Code submitted as PRs should adhere to the organization's standards.

   - Important for continuity
   - Makes code reviews easier
   - Current standards:

      - :ref:`cxx_conventions`.
      - :ref:`python-coding-conventions`.
      - :ref:`rest_conventions`.
      - :ref:`doxygen_conventions`.

#. PRs should contain code of high-caliber

   - NWChemEx strives to be an exemplar package
   - Easier to maintain good code
   - High-quality is especially important for senior developers as new

>      developers look to your code for examples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     developers look to your code for examples
```

   - There is a time and place for "just get something working", but should
     ideally be avoided

API Breaking Changes
====================

#. Should be last resort.

>    - Maintaining stable APIs leads to users instilling trust in us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Maintaining stable APIs leads to users and developers instilling trust in us.
```

>    - Need to document what was tried to avoid the break.

Reviewer: I won't make changes throughout the document, but it would be good to be consistent with using periods at the end of bullets or not using bullets.  Maybe a semi-colon?

If we want to go with periods at the end, then we should make everything a correct sentence.  I can make these changes if we go that route.

Author: I worked on this, but feel free to change it if you don't like what I have.

#. Need plan to avoid breaking API again.

   - Determine breakage points
   - Update design documentation relying on old API.
   - Carefully plan design of new API to avoid another break
   - Test new API

Features
========

#. Avoid "Hit by a bus scenario"

   - The NWChemEx code base needs to be maintainable by multiple developers.
   - Knowledge needs to be discoverable and shared
   - Design Documentation helps other developers understand the feature
   - User documentation makes sure users can use the feature without needing to
     read the code/ask a developer.
   - Developer documentation for technical aspects, avoids the costly exercise
     of reverse engineering how algorithms work.

#. Testing

   - As a scientific code we need to be reliable and reproducible.

>    - NWChemEx is a big project, can be very difficult to understand

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - NWChemEx is a big project, so it can be very difficult to understand
```

>      ramifications of a change. Can be caught be testing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     ramifications of a change. These changes can be caught by appropriate testing.
```

Patches
=======

#. Often small and ready to go upon opening PR

   - Don't require PR to be opened in advance.

#. Not all feature considerations are applicable

   - Documentation usually not needed for bug fixes.
   - Need tests to ensure bug doesn't appear again.
   - New documentation usually doesn't need new tests.

>    - Snippets added to documentation do need tested.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Snippets added to documentation do need to be tested.
```

two relate to ensuring that the reviewer knows what is supposed to be in the PR
and what is not. The fourth prompt is to hopefully avoid the reviewer needing
to explicitly ask for documentation, etc. And the fifth is to give a rough
idea of what still needs to be done before the PR can be merged.

The template contains comments which explain the prompts in more detail.

PR Author Process
=================

Once an author has decided to work on a feature or patch they should open a PR.
This entails:

#. Start a branch ``b`` for the PR.
#. Initiate a draft PR from ``b`` to the target branch (usually master/main).
#. Fill out the PR template GitHub prompts with.
#. Continue to push changes to the branch (checking off tasks as appropriate).

   - Generally speaking changes should clearly identify todos raised by the
     change, *e.g.*, if you add a function, but don't document it. Put
     ``TODO:document me``.
   - This helps reviewers know what you've overlooked vs. what you just haven't
     gotten around to.

#. Notify the reviewers when the author thinks that ``b`` is ready to merge
   by messaging ``r2g`` (or something similar) in the PR conversation.

> #. Respectfully address any reviewer concern. Marking each one as resolved when

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. Respectfully address any reviewer concerns. Marking each one as resolved when
```

   implement the feature, patch, etc.

Review Process
==============

.. note::

   GitHub allows reviewers to suggest changes. This is very useful when there's
   a typo, formatting error, etc. Please use this feature rather than
   writing comments like "should be capitalized".

Reviewers of a PR are expected to:

#. Understand what the PR is supposed to accomplish.
#. If necessary, the reviewers should help the author refine the PR contents.

   - Should the PR (and corresponding issue) be split into multiple issues/PRs?
   - Did the author miss any obvious concerns?

#. Keep an eye on the PR as it progresses. The frequency of "check-ins" should
   be inversely proportional to the author's familiarity with the process,
   *i.e.*, keep a closer eye on newer authors than seasoned veterans.
#. Comment on the code when issues are spotted.

   - Is the code using existing infrastructure to the extent possible?
   - Is the code accruing technical debt?
   - Is the formatting consistent? (Don't worry about formatting which CI will
     fix)

#. When the PR is marked as ready to go, complete a final pass through the code
   flagging any potential issues.

> #. If issues arise work with the author to resolve them. Repeating the previous

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. If issues arise, work with the author to resolve them. Repeating the previous
```

>    step as necessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   steps as necessary.
```

#. If you are the last reviewer to approve a PR then merge it (assuming all
   CI workflows have passed).

Notes on PR Quality
===================

.. note::

   The contents of this section are written assuming a 1.0 has occurred. We
   admittedly have not lived up to the lofty standards of this section and
   part of getting to a 1.0 is making sure existing code meets or exceeds
   these standards.

.. note::

   Occasional contributors from outside the project are not the target of this

>    section. This section is targeting developers who are part of the team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   section. This section is targeting developers who are regular contributors to the code (part of the team).
```

The checklist on the PR template is admittedly asking a lot of the author.
NWChemEx is designed to be a modular code. The vast majority of electronic
structure development occurs in modules. Each of these modules are disjoint,
and can be separately hosted. In turn, you can (and should) go through the
"just get something working" phase outside of the NWChemEx repositories.

> By making a PR which will add a module into an NWX repository you are saying the

Reviewer: How do we synch this with wanting people to write draft PRs to have discussions while the modules are being developed?

Author: I think I addressed this, but let me know if I didn't.

module is ready for users. This does not necessarily mean that it is as
performant as it is going to get, or that the module is fully featured. It
simply means that the contents of the module have been vetted for correctness
and the module has been found potentially useful. Once the module is merged it
becomes available to users, and since taking it back would break any code that
uses the module, we as a project are obligated to support that module or break

> API. The point being, we expect the module to be fully documented, tested, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
an API. The point being, we expect the module to be fully documented, tested, and
```

to adhere to the organization's standards so that we can begin stewardship of
the module.

> For PRs addressing infrastructure the requirements are a bit different.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For PRs addressing infrastructure, the requirements are a bit different.
```

Since infrastructure exists outside modules, it can't really be staged until

> it is ready. For infrastructure we will allow some technical debt, as long as

Reviewer: I am not quite sure what you mean by "it can't really be staged...".  Is it because it may cross over multiple repos? Maybe include an example or what you mean here.

Author: I took another stab at explaining what I meant. See if that's more clear.

the developer is willing to repay that technical debt, and makes a plan for
repaying it. In practice what this means is, say you really need a new type of
cache to complete a run. We'll let you merge that cache, say without
documentation, as long as you open an issue tracking that documentation is
still needed. Developers are expected to repay technical debt on a relatively
timely basis. That said, since the infrastructure is going into the main

> repository, it needs to still be vetted. This means it can not still be in the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
repository, it needs to still be vetted. This means it cannot still be in the
```

> design phase, nor can it be untested.

Reviewer: So discussions about the infrastructure should be primarily in issues?

Author: Maybe? PR discussions should focus on the code in the PR and how to change that code in order to  merge it; theoretically these are things like "you didn't document this" or "change this to X to get CI to pass". Issues are meant for hashing out all of the details needed to write a PR, so "what algorithm should I use" or "what should this property type look like". 

In reality this isn't as clear cut as it sounds because if you don't realize that something in your PR will be a problem, then you end up debating the merits of say an algorithm or design in the PR, whereas our delimitation would suggest it should happen in an issue. I think the solution is that some "issue" discussion in a PR is okay, but if it goes on too long it needs to be moved to an issue and tackled there.

are primarily meant to avoid accidental breakages. Part of this is through
automated continuous integration pipelines (making sure the code builds and
tests pass, etc.) and part of this is through manual code review, *i.e.*,
having people read your code.

Modern PRs are about more than just code review, they also are meant to be
learning opportunities for both experienced and inexperienced coders. Again,
no one person knows every aspect of a code, so when you make a PR it may turn
out that the reviewer knows a better way to do something. This works both ways
and reviewers often learn new techniques or discover previously unknown
features by reviewing code.

PRs are also about staking a claim. When you open a draft PR you're telling
people that you are going to work on resolving a bug etc. This tells other
people not to duplicate the effort and/or gives them a chance to join the
cause.

*****************
PR Considerations
*****************

This section lists considerations for authors and/or reviewers of PRs.
Following semantic versioning, we can think of each PR as addressing one of
three use cases:

#. API breaking changes

>    - Any change to a public-facing API which breaks previously working code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Any change to a public-facing API which breaks previously working code
```

#. New features

   - Introduces new code without breaking the API
   - New alternative APIs
   - Allows the code to compute new things
   - Quality of life improvements (e.g., extensive optimization)
   - Entirely new documentation sections

#. Patches

   - Largely modifies existing code
   - Bug fixes, typos, documentation tweaks
   - Performance optimizations spanning a relatively small amount of code

In general the PR considerations are going to be highly tied to what the PR
wants to accomplish, the following subsections group considerations by use cases
and assume archetypal PRs. In other words, not all points are going to be
relevant to every PR. If they're not relevant for a specific PR they should be
ignored.

General Considerations
======================

#. Making a PR should be easy.

   - If it's too hard to make a PR people won't do it.
   - Setting the bar too high discourages new contributors.

#. It should be possible to open the PR early.

   - Channel for discussion between reviewers and the PR author.
   - Gets work on radar of reviewers and other developers.

>    - Time to hash out what is and is not in scope before time is wasted

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Time to hash out what is and is not in scope before time is wasted.
```

#. The PR's lifetime should be short.

   - Shoot for merging in less than two weeks.

>      - Long-lived PRs are typically overlooked in ongoing design
>      - Easy for new changes to break correctness/performance of long-lived PR
>      - Others can't leverage your feature if it's a PR )
>      - PR author needs to keep PR up to date, which can be a lot of time if the
>        PR is long-lived
>      - Hard to remember subtleties over life of long-lived PRs (*e.g.*, why
>        something was/wasn't done)
>      - The longer the PR lives, the more code it tends to contain, and the harder
>        to review
>      - Long-lived PRs tend to increase the amount of technical debt by seemingly
>        justifying the "let's just merge this" mentality
> 
>    - Merge function by function if necessary

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     - Long-lived PRs are typically overlooked in ongoing design.
     - Easy for new changes to break correctness/performance of long-lived PR.
     - Others can't leverage your feature if it's a PR.
     - PR author needs to keep PR up to date with the rest of the code, which can be a lot of time if the
       PR is long-lived.
     - Hard to remember subtleties over life of long-lived PRs (*e.g.*, why
       something was/wasn't done).
     - The longer the PR lives, the more code it tends to contain, and the harder
       to review.
     - Long-lived PRs tend to increase the amount of technical debt by seemingly
       justifying the "let's just merge this" mentality.

   - Merge function by function if necessary.
```

   - See :ref:`using_issues_to_track_progress` for tracking progress.

#. Code submitted as PRs should adhere to the organization's standards.

   - Important for continuity
   - Makes code reviews easier
   - Current standards:

      - :ref:`cxx_conventions`.
      - :ref:`python-coding-conventions`.
      - :ref:`rest_conventions`.
      - :ref:`doxygen_conventions`.

#. PRs should contain code of high-caliber.

   - NWChemEx strives to be an exemplar package
   - Easier to maintain good code
   - High-quality is especially important for senior developers as new
     developers look to your code for examples
   - There is a time and place for "just get something working", but should
     ideally be avoided

API Breaking Changes
====================

#. Breaking API should be a last resort.

   - Maintaining stable APIs leads to users and developers instilling trust
     in us.
   - Need to document what was tried to avoid the break.

#. Need a plan to avoid breaking the APIs again.

>    - Determine breakage points
>    - Update design documentation relying on old API.
>    - Carefully plan design of new API to avoid another break
>    - Test new API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Determine breakage points.
   - Update design documentation relying on old API.
   - Carefully plan design of new API to avoid another break.
   - Test new API.
```

Features
========

#. Need to avoid the "Hit by a bus" scenario.

   - The NWChemEx code base needs to be maintainable by multiple developers.

>    - Knowledge needs to be discoverable and shared
>    - Design Documentation helps other developers understand the feature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Knowledge needs to be discoverable and shared.
   - Design Documentation helps other developers understand the feature.
```

   - Don't require PR to be opened in advance.

#. Not all feature considerations are applicable to patches.

   - Documentation usually not needed for bug fixes.
   - Need tests to ensure bug doesn't appear again.
   - New documentation usually doesn't need new tests.
   - Snippets added to documentation do need to be tested.
   - Performance updates may require updating documentation if it affects
     behavior and/or use cases, *e.g.*, the method's scope may have expanded.

*****************
Current PR Policy
*****************

Based on the above considerations our current PR policies are listed below.

Pull Request Template
=====================

.. note::

   GitHub supports PR templates (although as of this writing 12/8/2022) they do
   not seem to support the same feature set as issue templates (and some of the
   information seems outdated, like being able to have a separate directory).
   Should this get fixed we should look into multiple PRs for the different use
   cases.

We have written a PR template to streamline the process of opening PRs. The
template is designed to have meaningful prompts that can be filled out quickly.
The prompts ask the author to:

> #. specify what sort of PR this is (major, minor, or patch)
> #. describe what's in scope for the PR
> #. describe what's not in scope for the PR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#. specify what sort of PR this is (major, minor, or patch),
#. describe what's in scope for the PR,
#. describe what's not in scope for the PR,
```
